#summary phonon-vlc-mplayer TODO List
#labels Featured,Phase-Design,Phase-QA

==Seek bar==

Seek bar is not working cleanly with the MPlayer backend.
The VLC backend should be improved too.
MPlayer seek() code here:
http://code.google.com/p/phonon-vlc-mplayer/source/browse/trunk/phonon-vlc-mplayer/mplayer/MPlayerMediaObject.cpp
VLC seek() code here:
http://code.google.com/p/phonon-vlc-mplayer/source/browse/trunk/phonon-vlc-mplayer/vlc/VLCMediaObject.cpp

==Video window proper size==

Resize the video window to the current video size.
I managed to make this work, it does not now, I don't know why.
Code is here:
http://code.google.com/p/phonon-vlc-mplayer/source/browse/trunk/phonon-vlc-mplayer/VideoWidget.cpp
and here for the MPlayer specific part:
http://code.google.com/p/phonon-vlc-mplayer/source/browse/trunk/phonon-vlc-mplayer/mplayer/mplayer/MPlayerWindow.cpp

==More testing==

More testing with various file format is needed.

==Advanced features in libvlc-control==

libvlc-control lacks some features like advanced subtitles/chapters/angles/audio channels support.
It also lacks audio and video filters support.
That is why VLC backend is behind MPlayer backend support.

==MPlayer grey video window sometimes==

I've noticed MPlayer video window can be grey sometimes.
Specially when I downclock my video card (NVidia) under Windows.
+ MPlayer is very slow compare to VLC in this case.

==Add !VolumeFaderEffectClass, !AudioDataOutputClass, !VisualizationClass, !VideoDataOutputClass from Backend.cpp==

See code here: http://code.google.com/p/phonon-vlc-mplayer/source/browse/trunk/phonon-vlc-mplayer/Backend.cpp

==Add audio/video device selection (object description)==

See code here: http://code.google.com/p/phonon-vlc-mplayer/source/browse/trunk/phonon-vlc-mplayer/Backend.cpp

==Patch Phonon to allow backends initialization with user parameters==